Credit Card Fraud Detection Using Machine Learning Algorithms. 

Description of the problem: Fraud detection is a series of activities that hinders money from being obtained by illegal means which can include identity theft or stolen credit card. Fraud is a wide spread activity that can occur in a large number of industry but the concentration in this work is the credit card companies. 
The target in this work would be to determine if a transaction is fraudulent or not by considering certain variables from the dataset provided such as the location the transaction is being initiated, the IP address of the device, the historical transaction pattern or trend of the credit card owner, and the actual information of the transaction (how much?, what was the purchase?). These factors would be analyzed to be able to make the decision if the transaction should be initiated or declined. 
The detection would be done by machine learning which would involve the analysis and exploration of the available data, development of a model that will provide the best classification for the target (1- fraud, 0-no fraud). The user information and pattern is run through the model to train it and some fraudulent transactions has be available to train the model to find patterns and behavior to classify the data as fraudulent or not. 
The classifier in this case has to be very accurate in prediction true positive as false negatives can be very costly. False positives have a lower penalty/cost but it might be upsetting to customers if all legitimate transactions are labeled as fraudulent and being declined. 
The data would most likely contain a lot of no fraud transactions which makes it an imbalanced data set and care would be taken during the analyses and performance prediction of the model by using appropriate model evaluation techniques. 

Type of the Problem: This is a supervised learning. The training data set has transactions already labelled as fraudulent or non-fraudulent. The machine learning algorithms would be used to assign the data to the appropriate classifier label. Some of the algorithms that would be analyzed are support vector machine (SVM), logistic regression, random forest, KNN, XGBoost. 

Work Process Summary: Data mining, feature selection, data visualization and exploration, developing training model, validate model using performance metrics such as confusion metrics, F1-score, precision, recall, log loss etc. to appropriately classify the data as accurately as possible. The aim is to detect the fraudulent activities while reducing the false negatives as much as possible and detecting as many true positives as possible.

Work Summary 

Fraud detection is a series of activities that hinder money from being obtained by illegal means which can include identity theft or stolen credit card. Fraud is a widespread activity that can occur in a large number of industries but the concentration in this work is the credit card companies. With the amount of money at stake, there is a need for a reduction in the amount of credit card frauds, and machine learning algorithms are the methods that have been utilized in the credit card companies to tackle this problem.
The assumptions made in the modeling is that the state of the customer is where they registered with the credit card company. That the customers reported correct gender, age and other personal information.

The analysis of the data shows some features that are important in the determination of whether the transaction was fraudulent or not. Some of these features are the time of the transaction; the data analysis show that a most of the fraudulent transactions were done in the night and the non-fraudulent transaction were during the day. The amount of money of the transaction is also a major factor to consider. Fraudulent transactions were majorly in the between $500 - $1000. This shows that the criminals were careful not to have high transactions to mask these fraudulent transactions making it harder to detect. The state the transaction occurs also had an impact on fraud detection. The type of transaction and age was also a major feature for the modeling of fraudulent transactions. More aged customers were found to be more liable to fraud. We found that the gender of the card owner was not important as it didn’t vary also with fraudulent and non-fraudulent transactions.

Credit Card Company should pay attention to older customers who may not have a lot of control over their cards. This would reduce the risk of frauds. Transaction done after 10 pm should be watched closely to avoid frauds as that is the time most of the fraud occurred. The actual place the merchant was based would be used in the modeling approach. The risk of having a fraud is higher if the state of the customer is different from the place the merchant is located.

The random forest models were the most accurate predictive model. The features used in the model are amount (amt), state, age, and category. The hyperparameters of the models were tuned and the best model parameters are selected. The modeling approach would be to cluster the non-fraudulent transaction into three groups based on the amount of non-fraudulent transaction. This is to know the normal spending behavior of the customers. The frauds would be easier to detect this way. If a certain customer is spending more than is perceived from the spending history of the customer, then the transaction can be fraud. The two techniques were considred and the customer grouping had an edge over the ungrouped customer based on the recall, F1 and precision.

While we couldn’t reach the goal of 100% accuracy in fraud detection, we created a model that can get very close to that goal with enough time and data. More room for improvement can be found in the dataset. The precision of the model increases when the size of dataset is increased. An increase in the data volume will cause a positive difference in the model by making it more accurate in detecting frauds and reduce the number of false positives.
